NAMESPACES.md, before:

# Namespaces and Resources

The W3C WoT WG maintains a list of namespaces and the resources behind them in addition to the standardization documents.
This file lists them together.

For choosing new namespaces, please refer to <https://www.w3.org/2005/07/13-nsuri>

## JSON-LD Context Files and Ontologies

| W3C URL | GitHub URL | Content Type |
| ------- | ---------- | ------------ |
| `https://www.w3.org/2019/wot/td/v1` | `http://w3c.github.io/wot-thing-description/context/td-context-1.1.jsonld` | `application/ld+json`|
| `https://www.w3.org/2019/wot/td` | `http://w3c.github.io/wot-thing-description/ontology/td.ttl` | `text/turtle` |
| `https://www.w3.org/2019/wot/td` | `http://w3c.github.io/wot-thing-description/ontology/td.html` | `text/html` |
| `https://www.w3.org/2019/wot/json-schema` | `http://w3c.github.io/wot-thing-description/ontology/json-schema.ttl` | `text/turtle` |
| `https://www.w3.org/2019/wot/json-schema` | `http://w3c.github.io/wot-thing-description/ontology/jsonschema.html` | `text/html`|
| `https://www.w3.org/2019/wot/security` | `http://w3c.github.io/wot-thing-description/ontology/wot-security.ttl` | `text/turtle` |
| `https://www.w3.org/2019/wot/security` | `http://w3c.github.io/wot-thing-description/ontology/wotsec.html` | `text/html`|
| `https://www.w3.org/2019/wot/hypermedia` | `http://w3c.github.io/wot-thing-description/ontology/hypermedia.ttl` | `text/turtle`
| `https://www.w3.org/2019/wot/hypermedia`| `http://w3c.github.io/wot-thing-description/ontology/hyperm.html` | `text/html`
| `https://www.w3.org/2022/wot/td/v1.1` | TBD | `application/ld+json`|

## JSON Schemas

Commit message:

add (same as above) to some w3c urls

NAMESPACES.md, after:

# Namespaces and Resources

The W3C WoT WG maintains a list of namespaces and the resources behind them in addition to the standardization documents.
This file lists them together.

For choosing new namespaces, please refer to <https://www.w3.org/2005/07/13-nsuri>

## JSON-LD Context Files and Ontologies

| W3C URL | GitHub URL | Content Type |
| ------- | ---------- | ------------ |
| `https://www.w3.org/2019/wot/td/v1` | `http://w3c.github.io/wot-thing-description/context/td-context-1.1.jsonld` | `application/ld+json`|
| `https://www.w3.org/2019/wot/td` | `http://w3c.github.io/wot-thing-description/ontology/td.ttl` | `text/turtle` |
| `https://www.w3.org/2019/wot/td` (same as above) | `http://w3c.github.io/wot-thing-description/ontology/td.html` | `text/html` |
| `https://www.w3.org/2019/wot/json-schema` | `http://w3c.github.io/wot-thing-description/ontology/json-schema.ttl` | `text/turtle` |
| `https://www.w3.org/2019/wot/json-schema` (same as above) | `http://w3c.github.io/wot-thing-description/ontology/jsonschema.html` | `text/html`|
| `https://www.w3.org/2019/wot/security` | `http://w3c.github.io/wot-thing-description/ontology/wot-security.ttl` | `text/turtle` |
| `https://www.w3.org/2019/wot/security` (same as above) | `http://w3c.github.io/wot-thing-description/ontology/wotsec.html` | `text/html`|
| `https://www.w3.org/2019/wot/hypermedia` | `http://w3c.github.io/wot-thing-description/ontology/hypermedia.ttl` | `text/turtle`
| `https://www.w3.org/2019/wot/hypermedia` (same as above)| `http://w3c.github.io/wot-thing-description/ontology/hyperm.html` | `text/html`
| `https://www.w3.org/2022/wot/td/v1.1` | TBD | `application/ld+json`|

## JSON Schemas
