testing/README.md, before:

# Implementation Results
This directory contains the
[WoT Thing Description Implementation report](https://w3c.github.io/wot-thing-description/testing/report.html)
and the raw data for it.
The report itself is in [report.html](report.html).
Do not edit this file,
it is autogenerated by executing `npm run assertions` from the main directory,
and any edits would be overwritten the next time you generate it.

## Updating Test Results
Test results are currently in `wot/testing/tests/2019-05`.
To update a test run to incorporate new results or test cases,
first check out the `wot` repo,
```
git clone https://github.com/w3c/wot.git
```
and install the dependencies for the AssertionTester tool:
```
cd wot/testing/tools/thingweb-playground/AssertionTester
npm install
```

After installation, return to the `wot/testing/tests/2019-05`
and update input files in the `inputs` directory.
Each organization has a subdirectory here, for example `inputs/Intel`.
Under each organization's subdirectory are input files for one or
more implementations.  An implementation with a single TD can just
give that TD at the top level.  If an implementation has multiple
TDs, place them all in a subdirectory using the name of the implementation
but without a suffix.  See the `Intel` directory for an example of this;
the `intel-ocf` directory contains many TDs, but only counts as
one implementation. The test results for multiple TDs in a subdirectory
will be automatically merged. 
TDs are accepted with `.jsontd`, `.jsonld` and `.json` suffixes.

A file with the same name as an implementation but with a `csv`
suffix can also be given to provide manual assertions.
A template for manual assertions can be found in [manual.csv](manual.csv) in
the Thing Description repo under `testing`.
The assertions listed here will also be placed in a separate table in the
report.

To run all tests, while in the `wot/testing/tests/2019-05` directory,
run the following:
```
./update.sh | tee update.log
```
This puts all the results in the `outputs` directory and also logs
diagnostic output to `update.log`.  To check for errors do
```
grep ERROR update.log > errors.log
grep INVALID update.log >> errors.log
```
If there are no fatal errors (for example, a TD that does not validate or
is not JSON), this file should be empty.

The output data files are now in `outputs/*/*.csv`.
Check that there are no zero-length files in this list using `ls -l`.
If there are it means something has gone wrong, most likely an input
`csv` file with a syntax error. An easy way to check for `csv` syntax errors
is to open the file in github. If it does not render properly as a table,
there is an error, and github will even point to the offending line.

Go back to the `wot-thing-description/testing` directory and update the
inputs for the report generator in the `inputs/results` subdirectory:
```
cd ./wot-thing-description/testing/inputs/results
rm *.csv
cp ../../../../wot/testing/tests/2019-05/outputs/*/*.csv .
```
Now return to the main `wot-thing-description` directory and regenerate the
report:
```
cd ../../../
npm run assertions
```

If you need to update the at-risk highlighting in the TD specification,
you may also need to
run `npm run render` afterwards.
If new assertions have been added to the
TD specification then you will need to run `npm run render` BEFORE generating
the report.

## Suppressing Assertions
The file
[suppressed.csv](suppressed.csv)
can be used to list assertions for which
test results should be ignored.  Such results will also not be used for
"roll-up" results (when a child assertion, one with an underscore in its
name, is used to break down assertions with multiple options into simpler,
separately testable assertions).

## Manual Assertions
As already mentioned,
[manual.csv](manual.csv)
can be used to identify assertions that need
manual testing or declarations.

## At-Risk Highlighting
The file
[atrisk.css](atrisk.css) provides highlighting for at-risk elements in
the report but should NOT be edited directly as it is autogenerated.
Instead edit 
[inputs/atrisk.csv](inputs/atrisk.csv).

## Report Template 
The HTML template for the Implementation Report is in 
[inputs/template.html](inputs/template.html).
If you wish to edit the main explanatory text of the report or
update the metadata (date, authors, etc.), do so here.

## Implementation Descriptions
Implementations are described in HTML files in
[inputs/implementations](inputs/implementations), with one
file per contributing organization.
The IDs declared in these descriptions should be unique and 
descriptive as they will be used elsewhere, for example, 
in the interoperability data files referring to those implementations.
To add a new description, use the template in 
[inputs/implementations/template.html.t](inputs/implementations/template.html.t).

Implementations should also be entered into the table
in [inputs/impl.csv](inputs/impl.csv) with identifiers, titles, and roles
consistent with those assigned in the above HTML files.
An implementation can either be a consumer,
a producer (eg exposing a TD, a Thing), or both (eg a Servient).

## Test Specifications
A procedure for testing each normative assertion should be given in
[inputs/testspec.html](inputs/testspec.html).
These may be included as an appendix in the report,
but are currently suppressed.

Test specifications can be given both for
assertions given in the specification 
(see [inputs/results/template.csv.t](inputs/results/template.csv.t) 
for an automatically
generated list of identifiers) and for any extra assertions in 
[inputs/extra-asserts.html](inputs/extra-asserts.html).

## Extra Assertions
Assertions used for testing but not (yet) included in the specification
may be listed in 
[inputs/extra-asserts.html](inputs/extra-asserts.html).
The intention is that these assertions should
eventually, and before final release, be inserted into the final specification.

## At-Risk Assertions
Assertions related to features that are at risk of being deleted from the final
CR should be identified in the [inputs/atrisk.csv](inputs/atrisk.csv) file.
The assertion text for these will be given a special color in the report table.

## Categories
Assertions can be assigned to a category in
[inputs/categories.csv](inputs/categories.csv).
Eventually the table _may_ be sorted to group categories
into sections; for now it is just an extra column.

## Dependencies
Dependencies between assertions can be recorded in
[inputs/depends.csv](inputs/depends.csv).  
The "Parents" column relates detailed assertions to more general assertions.
the "Contexts" column indicates assertions that only need to be considered in
a particular context (either syntactic, if pointing at another vocabulary item,
or logical, if pointing at another optional assertion).
Both "Parents" and "Contexts" may have multiple items separated by spaces.
Entries should be IDs of other assertions.
Use `"null"` if there is no dependency.

## Result Data
Each implementation should record
which features they have implemented and tested under the 
[inputs/results](inputs/results) directory.
All data will be read and merged into the report.
Mark each implemented feature with a status of either 
`"pass"` (if it satisfies the specification)
or 
`"fail"` (if it does not).  
If you have not implemented a feature, list its status as `"not-impl"`.

Features not listed will not be included in the sums; this is 
distinct from `"not-impl"` as absence of a feature is meant to be used
to allow different features to be reported in different files.

If you did not implement a feature on purpose please indicate this explicitly.

Any other status will be ignored (e.g. `"null"` as used in the template).
If you have tested a feature in multiple
implementations check in one file per implementation, using as a filename
the id given in the template for the implementations' description.
Use a convention
like `ORG-IMPL-MODULE.csv` for the filename.
The filename should also be used as an id in the 
description of each implementation.

The [inputs/results/template.csv](inputs/results/template.csv) 
file lists all features but with a `"null"` status.
*Do not edit this file; it is autogenerated.*
It is provided so
you can use it as a reference and as a basis for your own data files.

Files should be in CSV format, including headers as defined in 
[inputs/results/template.csv](results/tempate.csv),
and will be parsed by the `csvtojson` Node.js library.

## To Dos
* Test specs need to be completed.
* Interop and results data needs to be collected and collated.
* Sort categories together in the output and put the category in a section header instead of a column.
* Sanity check that parent assertions are only marked as "pass" if all sub-assertions are also marked as "pass".

Commit message:

Add doc to fetch latest impl descriptions from wot repo

testing/README.md, after:

# Implementation Results
This directory contains the
[WoT Thing Description Implementation report](https://w3c.github.io/wot-thing-description/testing/report.html)
and the raw data for it.
The report itself is in [report.html](report.html).
Do not edit this file,
it is autogenerated by executing `npm run assertions` from the main directory,
and any edits would be overwritten the next time you generate it.

## Updating Test Results
Test results are currently in `wot/testing/tests/2019-05`.
To update a test run to incorporate new results or test cases,
first check out the `wot` repo,
```
git clone https://github.com/w3c/wot.git
```
and install the dependencies for the AssertionTester tool:
```
cd wot/testing/tools/thingweb-playground/AssertionTester
npm install
```

After installation, return to the `wot/testing/tests/2019-05`
and update input files in the `inputs` directory.
Each organization has a subdirectory here, for example `inputs/Intel`.
Under each organization's subdirectory are input files for one or
more implementations.  An implementation with a single TD can just
give that TD at the top level.  If an implementation has multiple
TDs, place them all in a subdirectory using the name of the implementation
but without a suffix.  See the `Intel` directory for an example of this;
the `intel-ocf` directory contains many TDs, but only counts as
one implementation. The test results for multiple TDs in a subdirectory
will be automatically merged. 
TDs are accepted with `.jsontd`, `.jsonld` and `.json` suffixes.

A file with the same name as an implementation but with a `csv`
suffix can also be given to provide manual assertions.
A template for manual assertions can be found in [manual.csv](manual.csv) in
the Thing Description repo under `testing`.
The assertions listed here will also be placed in a separate table in the
report.

To run all tests, while in the `wot/testing/tests/2019-05` directory,
run the following:
```
./update.sh | tee update.log
```
This puts all the results in the `outputs` directory and also logs
diagnostic output to `update.log`.  To check for errors do
```
grep ERROR update.log > errors.log
grep INVALID update.log >> errors.log
```
If there are no fatal errors (for example, a TD that does not validate or
is not JSON), this file should be empty.

The output data files are now in `outputs/*/*.csv`.
Check that there are no zero-length files in this list using `ls -l`.
If there are it means something has gone wrong, most likely an input
`csv` file with a syntax error. An easy way to check for `csv` syntax errors
is to open the file in github. If it does not render properly as a table,
there is an error, and github will even point to the offending line.

Go back to the `wot-thing-description/testing` directory and update the
inputs for the report generator in the `inputs/implementations` subdirectory:
```
cd ./wot-thing-description/testing/inputs/implementations
rm *.html
cp ../../../../wot/testing/tests/2019-05/descriptions/*/*.html .
```
And in the `inputs/results` subdirectory:
```
cd ./wot-thing-description/testing/inputs/results
rm *.csv
cp ../../../../wot/testing/tests/2019-05/outputs/*/*.csv .
```
Now return to the main `wot-thing-description` directory and regenerate the
report:
```
cd ../../../
npm run assertions
```

If you need to update the at-risk highlighting in the TD specification,
you may also need to
run `npm run render` afterwards.
If new assertions have been added to the
TD specification then you will need to run `npm run render` BEFORE generating
the report.

## Suppressing Assertions
The file
[suppressed.csv](suppressed.csv)
can be used to list assertions for which
test results should be ignored.  Such results will also not be used for
"roll-up" results (when a child assertion, one with an underscore in its
name, is used to break down assertions with multiple options into simpler,
separately testable assertions).

## Manual Assertions
As already mentioned,
[manual.csv](manual.csv)
can be used to identify assertions that need
manual testing or declarations.

## At-Risk Highlighting
The file
[atrisk.css](atrisk.css) provides highlighting for at-risk elements in
the report but should NOT be edited directly as it is autogenerated.
Instead edit 
[inputs/atrisk.csv](inputs/atrisk.csv).

## Report Template 
The HTML template for the Implementation Report is in 
[inputs/template.html](inputs/template.html).
If you wish to edit the main explanatory text of the report or
update the metadata (date, authors, etc.), do so here.

## Implementation Descriptions
Implementations are described in HTML files in
[inputs/implementations](inputs/implementations), with one
file per contributing organization.
The IDs declared in these descriptions should be unique and 
descriptive as they will be used elsewhere, for example, 
in the interoperability data files referring to those implementations.
To add a new description, use the template in 
[inputs/implementations/template.html.t](inputs/implementations/template.html.t).

Implementations should also be entered into the table
in [inputs/impl.csv](inputs/impl.csv) with identifiers, titles, and roles
consistent with those assigned in the above HTML files.
An implementation can either be a consumer,
a producer (eg exposing a TD, a Thing), or both (eg a Servient).

## Test Specifications
A procedure for testing each normative assertion should be given in
[inputs/testspec.html](inputs/testspec.html).
These may be included as an appendix in the report,
but are currently suppressed.

Test specifications can be given both for
assertions given in the specification 
(see [inputs/results/template.csv.t](inputs/results/template.csv.t) 
for an automatically
generated list of identifiers) and for any extra assertions in 
[inputs/extra-asserts.html](inputs/extra-asserts.html).

## Extra Assertions
Assertions used for testing but not (yet) included in the specification
may be listed in 
[inputs/extra-asserts.html](inputs/extra-asserts.html).
The intention is that these assertions should
eventually, and before final release, be inserted into the final specification.

## At-Risk Assertions
Assertions related to features that are at risk of being deleted from the final
CR should be identified in the [inputs/atrisk.csv](inputs/atrisk.csv) file.
The assertion text for these will be given a special color in the report table.

## Categories
Assertions can be assigned to a category in
[inputs/categories.csv](inputs/categories.csv).
Eventually the table _may_ be sorted to group categories
into sections; for now it is just an extra column.

## Dependencies
Dependencies between assertions can be recorded in
[inputs/depends.csv](inputs/depends.csv).  
The "Parents" column relates detailed assertions to more general assertions.
the "Contexts" column indicates assertions that only need to be considered in
a particular context (either syntactic, if pointing at another vocabulary item,
or logical, if pointing at another optional assertion).
Both "Parents" and "Contexts" may have multiple items separated by spaces.
Entries should be IDs of other assertions.
Use `"null"` if there is no dependency.

## Result Data
Each implementation should record
which features they have implemented and tested under the 
[inputs/results](inputs/results) directory.
All data will be read and merged into the report.
Mark each implemented feature with a status of either 
`"pass"` (if it satisfies the specification)
or 
`"fail"` (if it does not).  
If you have not implemented a feature, list its status as `"not-impl"`.

Features not listed will not be included in the sums; this is 
distinct from `"not-impl"` as absence of a feature is meant to be used
to allow different features to be reported in different files.

If you did not implement a feature on purpose please indicate this explicitly.

Any other status will be ignored (e.g. `"null"` as used in the template).
If you have tested a feature in multiple
implementations check in one file per implementation, using as a filename
the id given in the template for the implementations' description.
Use a convention
like `ORG-IMPL-MODULE.csv` for the filename.
The filename should also be used as an id in the 
description of each implementation.

The [inputs/results/template.csv](inputs/results/template.csv) 
file lists all features but with a `"null"` status.
*Do not edit this file; it is autogenerated.*
It is provided so
you can use it as a reference and as a basis for your own data files.

Files should be in CSV format, including headers as defined in 
[inputs/results/template.csv](results/tempate.csv),
and will be parsed by the `csvtojson` Node.js library.

## To Dos
* Test specs need to be completed.
* Interop and results data needs to be collected and collated.
* Sort categories together in the output and put the category in a section header instead of a column.
* Sanity check that parent assertions are only marked as "pass" if all sub-assertions are also marked as "pass".
