explainer/TAG_W3C_Thing_Description.md, before:

Góðan dag TAG！

I'm requesting a TAG review of:

  - Name: _Web of Things (WoT) Thing Description_
  - Specification URL: https://cdn.staticaly.com/gh/w3c/wot-thing-description/TAG-review/index.html?env=dev
  - Explainer, Requirements Doc, or Example code:  https://github.com/w3c/wot-thing-description/blob/master/explainer/Explainer.md
  - Tests: https://w3c.github.io/wot-thing-description/testing/report.html
  - Primary contacts: @sebastiankb, @takuki, @mmccool, @vcharpenay

Further details (optional):

  - Relevant time constraints or deadlines: 
     * TAG review feedback need by April 5th
     * CR transition planned for April 9th
        - last possible date to make June 25 deadline for REC
        - end of WG charter is June 30

  - [x] I have read and filled out the [Self-Review Questionnare on Security and Privacy](https://www.w3.org/TR/security-privacy-questionnaire/). The [assessment is here](https://github.com/w3c/wot-architecture/blob/master/proposals/security_and_privacy.md); this assessment is shared with all _Web of Things_ documents.
  - [X] I have reviewed the TAG's [API Design Principles](https://w3ctag.github.io/design-principles/)

You should also know that...

In the Thing Description specification, text and table entries highlighted with a yellow background indicates a feature associated with an at-risk assertion for which insufficient implementation experience exists. When an entire section is at-risk the words "This section is at risk." will be placed at the start of the section and highlighted with a yellow background.

- The [WoT Security and Privacy Considerations](https://github.com/w3c/wot-security/) document provides extra discussion of security with an IoT focus.
- The related [WoT Architecture](https://github.com/w3c/wot-architecture) document is being submitted for TAG review at the same time.
    - Tests of implementations will be associated with this document
- The [WoT Binding Templates](https://github.com/w3c/wot-binding-templates) informative WG note describing an optional WoT building block.
- The [WoT Scripting API](https://github.com/w3c/wot-scripting-api) informative WG note describing an optional WoT building block.

During the TAG review period, we plan to update the test results to reduce the number of at-risk assertions as much as possible before CR submission. 

We'd prefer the TAG provide feedback as (please select one):

  - [x] open issues in our Github repo for each point of feedback
  - [ ] open a single issue in our Github repo for the entire review
  - [ ] leave review feedback as a comment in this issue and @-notify [github usernames]

Commit message:

Update TAG message
- Change link to explainer to refer to the TAG-review branch
- Add a note that the "Test" link intentionally refers to the master branch, not the TAG-review branch
This matches what is at https://github.com/w3ctag/design-reviews/issues/357

explainer/TAG_W3C_Thing_Description.md, after:

Góðan dag TAG！

I'm requesting a TAG review of:

  - Name: _Web of Things (WoT) Thing Description_
  - Specification URL: https://cdn.staticaly.com/gh/w3c/wot-thing-description/TAG-review/index.html?env=dev
  - Explainer, Requirements Doc, or Example code:  https://github.com/w3c/wot-thing-description/blob/TAG-review/explainer/Explainer.md
  - Tests: https://w3c.github.io/wot-thing-description/testing/report.html
  - Primary contacts: @sebastiankb, @takuki, @mmccool, @vcharpenay

Further details (optional):

  - Relevant time constraints or deadlines: 
     * TAG review feedback need by April 5th
     * CR transition planned for April 9th
        - last possible date to make June 25 deadline for REC
        - end of WG charter is June 30

  - [x] I have read and filled out the [Self-Review Questionnare on Security and Privacy](https://www.w3.org/TR/security-privacy-questionnaire/). The [assessment is here](https://github.com/w3c/wot-architecture/blob/master/proposals/security_and_privacy.md); this assessment is shared with all _Web of Things_ documents.
  - [X] I have reviewed the TAG's [API Design Principles](https://w3ctag.github.io/design-principles/)

You should also know that...

In the Thing Description specification, text and table entries highlighted with a yellow background indicates a feature associated with an at-risk assertion for which insufficient implementation experience exists. When an entire section is at-risk the words "This section is at risk." will be placed at the start of the section and highlighted with a yellow background.

- The [WoT Security and Privacy Considerations](https://github.com/w3c/wot-security/) document provides extra discussion of security with an IoT focus.
- The related [WoT Architecture](https://github.com/w3c/wot-architecture) document is being submitted for TAG review at the same time.
    - Tests of implementations will be associated with this document
- The [WoT Binding Templates](https://github.com/w3c/wot-binding-templates) informative WG note describing an optional WoT building block.
- The [WoT Scripting API](https://github.com/w3c/wot-scripting-api) informative WG note describing an optional WoT building block.

During the TAG review period, we plan to update the test results to reduce the number of at-risk assertions as much as possible before CR submission.  The link above refers to the master branch of the repository, not the TAG-review branch.

We'd prefer the TAG provide feedback as (please select one):

  - [x] open issues in our Github repo for each point of feedback
  - [ ] open a single issue in our Github repo for the entire review
  - [ ] leave review feedback as a comment in this issue and @-notify [github usernames]
